good morning everybody I'm Chris
Espinosa of the Apple developers tools
team and I'm here to talk about modeling
and design and Xcode I'd like to thank
you for coming out at nine o'clock on
the Friday morning before a three-day
holiday weekend to reward your
perseverance we're going to be
auctioning off this rack of rare imax
your last chance before it sep tember to
get some not really we will have
something for you at the end of the show
though so i'm going to be talking to you
about the design and modeling tools and
about what models are and what they do
for you in your software design process
how they're integrated into your
workflow in xcode and talk about some of
the future directions for design tools
as i mentioned on Monday in Ted session
we're going we offer two plugins and
we're going to be talking about those
today but we expect these to be the
first two of many to augment your coding
workflow with design tools what you're
going to learn is how to create navigate
the class models whether you're using
c++ Objective C or Java how to save and
share the class models with other people
in your projects how to create a data
model for the core data framework build
a core data schema from it and deploy an
application using it you should know
something about object-oriented program
if if you're using straight c
programming for the command line ur the
colonel now would be an excellent time
to deplane because this has nothing to
do with you but if you do object
oriented programming in C++ Objective C
or Java stick around you'll learn
something it will help to know about
core data framework for using the data
models if you are not using the core
data framework you might want to look
into it it's very cool and can be used
from either objective-c or from C++ why
did we put diagrams in Xcode the thing
that really drove it was the core data
frame work in that we knew we needed to
create schemas for the core data
framework and that the best way to see
your schema and to understand it and to
create it was with a visual model rather
than with a big table or a big hunka XML
so modeling
the data schema for the core data
framework was really are driving purpose
but we also knew that there was a big
missing piece in Xcode in that we didn't
have a good class diagram to let you get
a bird's eye view of your class
hierarchy of your projects we decided if
we could kill two birds with one stone
and have one diagramming tool that did
both that'd be really helpful especially
if we could wire it in so you can use it
to browse and navigate your code from
the diagram rather than just from the
class pop-up or the project into the
project symbols list diagrams are easier
to grok in a large scale than looking at
your code or even looking at it in the
class browser table wise we wanted to
draw you some beautiful pictures not
just that you could see and visualize
but that you could change and modify
yourself so you can use them not just
for the tool to communicate to you what
your code looks like but for you to
communicate to others what your code
looks like so models are integrated into
Xcode they're not a separate process
that you run to take a look at your
project they're not a window you pop up
in order to see it that's separate from
your workflow they're deeply integrated
into Xcode to the degree that model
files our project files in your project
you build them you save them you check
them in you commit them and for data
model files you even build them in your
build process that's how deeply
integrated they are they are integrated
into the SCM system whether you're using
CVS or perforce or subversion so that
they can be checked in just like nim
files just like project files just like
source code files so let's talk first
about the class models you probably saw
the class models in Ted's presentation
on Monday you may not have seen class
model since then so we're going to be
doing a quite a bit of time with class
models today first of all their language
agnostic they show c++ Objective C or
Java in this first instance as we extend
Xcode to deal with more languages as we
add more design plugins you'll see class
models for other things as well we have
a generic UML to based framework
underneath so we can model pretty much
anything that you want to model right
now what you've got on you
disk with Xcode 2 point 0 is C++
objective c and java there are two kinds
of models because we knew that you'd
have different modes working depending
upon whether you were really down
drilling into your code or whether you
just wanted to get an overview of
something new so we have quick models
which is here's something i want to see
it and i don't care if it goes away when
i close my session and then there are
user models which is here's something
I'm really working on I want to hone it
I want to tailor it I want to use it as
my principal navigation tool and I want
you to save that with my project so
quick models first quick models are you
select something in your project you
choose quick model from the menu and it
shows you a class diagram it's really
simple it's really straightforward you
don't have to save it with your project
you don't have to commit it to your
repository it includes all of the things
all of the objects that are in that
group you selected and it includes the
first parent outside the group doesn't
go all the way up the hierarchy so you
don't see you know ninety percent
foundation dot framework and ten percent
your project it only goes to the first
root and that's a tool for clarity
rather than you know completeness it
will model your whole project it'll
model a group it'll model a multiple
selection of header files or source
files it'll model a target and you can
pick anything just a quick model the
layouts automatic it does a pretty nice
view and you can tailor it you can drag
things out you can move things around to
see them you can use it to navigate but
it's not stored with your project so any
changes you make or ephemeral it's like
a temp file code models can be pretty
big so we've given you some navigation
tools first there's a zoom out zoom in
like any graphic tool so you can get a
bird's eye view or you can hone in on a
particular class there are tool tips so
if you're zoomed out you can actually
read it because the type is you know
like four points when you're zoomed out
there's type select to navigate out so
you can type the name in the class and
you can find it in the diagram and then
zoom in to where it is and you can as
you saw in the presentation on Monday
you can go directly from the class
diagram to the interface declaration to
the implementation source code or to the
it says class browser but this is
in error you can go to the documentation
if it happens to be a class that is
built in to an apple framework with the
class diagrams you can customize them as
I mentioned you can expand and collapse
the boxes you can drag them to rearrange
you do group selects and things like
that you can relay out the diagram to
get the boxes out laid out nice you can
use custom colors in your classes once
again for quick models this is more or
less irrelevant because these changes
aren't saved and then there's the
standard graphics tools that you might
find in the graphics layout programs
such as alignment locking and unlocking
things like that so now we're going to
give a demo of quick models and this is
Stefan Reich of my group to show you
what the quick models of life good
morning everybody would like to show you
how to create quick models and how to
work with the class diagrams and vanilla
so as Chris mentioned you can cat you
can create quick models from individual
files from groups from frameworks and
even from targets and so let's plan and
create a quick model from the sauce
group do you see this handy design menu
class model and we go to quick model and
here we are for those of you who know
UML you will notice that this is the
Senate um out to notation we have
different colors for the different
objects which means classes are in bloom
protocols or interfaces depending on the
on the language here actually using or
modeling are in red and then finally
categories are displayed in the green so
it's easy to distinguish the different
types in the credit overview of of your
structure of the project you see that
inheritance is modeled or is displayed
with a solid arrow whereas the the
implement relationship is modeled with
the dotted line so this means derived
class for example implements derive
protocol and derived protocol in turn
extends base protocol the the initial
diagram that comes up is very well it
doesn't contain much detail
is on purpose because it gives you a
quick overview of of the product and so
what you do is you can select individual
operations to show properties or if you
want to show more you select them all
and bring up the context menu the
context menu contains all of the items
that Chris already mentioned alignment
many of the graphic functions locking
unlocking and then working with the
weather compartment so we're going to
expand the compartments here and you see
this looks a little bit nursing so we
just trigger they lay outside with them
again and the blade out of correctly and
so this is this is a good way of
exploring unknown projects or getting an
overview of code that somebody else
wrote and so on you can also see that it
is easy to hand optimize the delay out
its diagram if you if you if you think
that the layout I wouldn't did a bad job
or it just is not is not very easy to
understand you know you can just do it
yourself and so of course the big
question is what happens to the diagram
when you change the code let's have a
look at what happens and so we're
looking at the base football here not
there and for everybody to see we'll
zoom in on it you see there's two
methods defined and on the right-hand
side here's the source code so we just
emulate deleting a method by commenting
it out and you see that the diagrams are
actually interested
I thought the same thing happens when
you add a new method yeah so this is
this is how you work with the class
diagrams and how to play a quick models
thanks Ivana i love this tool it is
clear it's instant it's really
responsive and i've used it to figure
out what the heck Stefan and Miguel had
been writing if I open try to look at
the underlying framework save built to
make this all work the first thing I did
was well I used the modeling tool to
model the modeling tool framework so I
can figure it out it was really terrific
so the quick models I think are going to
be the one to use all the time just to
pick a group pick a target pick a
framework model it figure out what's
going on what's related to what and
navigate but if you want to if you've
got a lot of people working on a project
or if you're going to be spending a lot
of time in one part of the code you can
build your own navigation front end to
that code with the tools that Stefan
described and you can persist those you
can save those with the project in a
user model you define the content and
the layout the positioning the
directional arrows run the colors of the
bubbles what's expanded what's not
expanded things like that you can focus
on a subset of code by picking either
specific source files or groups of
source files to model and you can not
only track the changes in the files
you're modeling but if you model at a
group level you can track changes in
that group so that if new classes or new
files are added to that group they're
automatically added to the model it's
very cool and then once again these
changes are stored with the project so
that any changes you make the if
somebody checks it out from the
repository they go to your model they
can see how you've arranged things how
you've laid them out so let's go back to
demo one and should have on can show you
use models ok so here the user motive we
create use a motor to little bit
different events and quick ones because
I you know one clip
okay here we go so user models are
created a little bit differently because
we hook them up in the new file
assistant and you see the design option
here and we chose class model and
renamed really a static user model and
so this is the the core of creating user
models on the left hand side you see
beta TV the option of what kind of model
you create it's either static or a
tracking model this create we choose the
static model and for now we create the
static model based on the source code
again which will pick up all of the
source files so we click add and you see
that out of the source files that are
contained in the sauce group are
actually added and we hit finish and
here they are so we little bit larger
view of this this is actually a mixed
language project it contains both the
seat ourselves and objective-c files and
well this is this is how the general use
them what it looks like so the important
thing is once you create a user model it
stays the same way regardless of if you
change the source code or if you add new
classes to the group or if you even add
new classes to the source files that you
created the model from so it's a little
bit like a like a snapshot it's very
handy if you want to document the
evolution in your project for example
now let's have a look at how the
tracking models work because they are
very different so we create in the same
way
and choose tracking now one of the
difference with with tracking models is
that they are mostly based on a group
and so the idea is that you organize
your code depending on your internal
structure you organize them in groups so
that they make actually send to you so
that it's easy for you to understand
certain components of your application
and so we will model this by in this
case of using the offline sauces group
which model to separate aspect of this
application and you see on the right
hand side you don't see individual files
but you see selected groups so in this
case there's only one one file and two
classes in the offline process group and
so what happens if you rearrange your
code or if you add new classes to the to
the group that you're modeling is this
let me into separate model here to the
right
and so I move these two files in this
group and you see they're added
automatically to your model so it
becomes very easy to track to check to
drag the groups that define a specific
sub component of your application and
obviously if I drag them out they will
disappear as well now if if I add if I
would add one class additional class
here it will also show up in the diagram
as well so you get 52 things for free
adding rearranging your code will update
the model I mean we arranging the files
in the group in class we will update
your model but also adding new classes
new categories new interfaces and
existing classes will also show up in
the model that's it so far thank you
thank you funny I think class modeling
is going to be great help to you in your
everyday work with Xcode it's going to
give you a bird's eye view of your
project so you can figure out what's
going on in a big lump of source code it
will help you make custom diagrams to
communicate the architecture of the
function of your code to other people on
your team and it'll help you learn about
third-party frameworks or Apple
frameworks just by picking the Apple
framework and getting an overview there
are some limitations in the version that
you have in your on your tiger disk with
Xcode 2 point 0 1 the key thing to
remember is that the class diagramming
works off of the project index if you
have turned off code since if you've
turned off indexing you will not get
class diagrams if the index hasn't
completed you won't get class diagrams
or you will get a partial class diagram
to the degree that the index is
completed so make sure that your index
is complete before trying to build class
diagrams and if you've structured your
project in a way that exploits some of
the shortcomings in the indexer for
example you're including header files
that have C++ classes but they're
included from a dot C file the indexer
will think
well that header must be a sea header
and so it can't possibly contain index
files if your classes don't show up in
your project symbols smart group they
won't show up in the class diagram so if
things are missing from your class
diagram file bugs we know about them we
will fix them by the time the ship's so
let's talk about core data models now
how many people went to the introduction
or advanced core data sessions yesterday
you've all seen this demo great okay so
we will go a little more in-depth than
what Andre I showed in those but you
you've probably seen this two or three
times by now core data models are kind
of like class user models but they model
data objects in a persistent store
rather than modeling classes in your
source code instead of inheritance
relationships they have two one and too
many relationships like you'd find in a
database or in an XML data store file
rather than in the the structure of an
object-oriented piece of code just to
recap what coordinate is about I
probably don't need to tell you this
again but its objects graph management
for document based applications it'll
manage your object lifecycle it manages
undo redo it manages validation and
relations between data objects and it
persists a graph of objects either to a
binary archive store to an XML format or
to a sequel light database and it's
driven by schemas and that's why we have
this design tool because we need a good
way for you to create those schemas
instead of having to write a hunk of XML
or to write a lot of code to create the
schema schema is a model of your
persistent storage what objects are in
your store and how they relate to each
other structured by the relationships
the containment relationships between
the objects rather than by the class
relationships in your source code and
it's keyed to your applications classes
but you can of course have objects that
aren't backed up by application classes
butter instead interpreted by by other
pieces of source code the entities in a
data model are like classes in the class
model attributes in a data model are
like class variables relationships are
like inheritance
for category or protocol or whatever and
there's this new thing called a fetch
spec which is essentially a database
query you make a schema in one of three
ways you can derive it from an XML now
you may I've gotten this question
several times this week I have tried to
feed xml into the importer in the design
tool and it crashes or it breaks or
doesn't work well you're trying to feed
it somebody else's XML not ours right
now the only XML we import is the XML
we've exported because it's tagged
correctly to create a schema we'll look
at extending that in the future and
doing more generic job of looking at an
XML schema or a DTD or something like
that but right now when you read in the
XML it's only the special XML that we
ourselves have created on exporting it
okay you can however derive it from your
application sources if you have an
objective-c application with a bunch of
classes that represent your data model
you can take those classes and bring
them right into the data model and
create a data model from them that's
probably the most useful thing if you've
got an existing application or if you're
writing an application from scratch and
you want to start with the data model
and then build the classes up from there
you can start with a blank diagram and
then create the model from scratch if
you create it from scratch then you can
just create new entities in the diagram
with new entity from the design menu and
then you enter the attributes new enter
the relationships and it's right there
in your model then you can back it up
with code if you start with an existing
data or schema you import it from the
XML once again it's the XML we export
and if you create it from code then you
just specify the code files to model
just like you specified the code models
to create a class ma the code files to
create a class class model from that
classes are mapped into entities in the
model the instance variables become
attributes and the pointers to other
classes in that model become the
relationships once you've created a
model you can change the attributes you
can change the classes you can set
values on them you can
do a lot more than just use it for
navigation so we've added a data model
browser that lets you look at your
objects your entities in tabular view
and actually go in and inspect and
change their values and there's a detail
editor that lets you set the values on
those entities in a very detailed way on
very powerful way and here to
demonstrate that is in Miguel Sanchez
you guys hear me so my name is Miguel
Sanchez and I'm here to walk you through
the creation of a data model based on
reverse engineering code I would focus
so much on what we do with the code for
that I asked you reviewed the advanced
core data session that we did yesterday
because this is a tool session I'm going
to go more into detail as to what is
really going on at the tool level and
behind the scenes so what we have here
is classes that represent a very simple
mail system we have things like account
headers mailbox messages we want to
create the data model that represents
the entities for these classes so as
we've seen before data models are just
another type of file type so we can do
add new file you will see a new file
size called data model it's called is my
model and this is where I'm going to
slow down a little bit we have an
assistant that allows you to
reverse-engineer your code for for data
models if you wanted an empty data model
you would just click finish without
selecting any classes and that's how you
get there there is no Neal empty model
option anywhere so you just click finish
what we see here on the left-hand side
is your groups and fios tree that you
have in your xcode window behind this
assistant so here we have old HS MMG
confining your project as I select a
group for example in this case I'm going
to sect select my data classes group
we get in the second table view the list
of classes that are containing this
files in caso an important thing is
happening here we're using the indexer
to figure out what classes really are
contained inside does HSN does that am
so if you happen to try this at home and
you see a little spinning wheel right
about here I believe that's because the
indexing is not yet done so it's not
that the assistant is broken or anything
just wait for the indexing to be done
and then that's how we can figure out
the information so we select a group we
get classes we add all of the classes
because that's that's what we want the
model to contain and we click finish so
here's the reverse engineer model when
we hide in the detail area there for our
classes now the lines are not
inheritance unlike the class demo you
just saw I'll talk a little bit more
about that so what what it was reversing
hearing what happened here for each
class that we found in your files we
obviously created an entity so we have
the person entity for the person for
class a message your code contains ivars
so we try to be smart and for each I've
are we we find in your code we create an
attribute inside you're inside your
entities now there's a little more going
on there we don't just blindly copy
attribute names to to entity attribute
i'm sorry i VAR attribute names to enter
together is because you might have
underscore attributes that you don't
really want persistent so we try to be a
little smart and what really happens is
though we go through your attribute list
and we see if you can find if we can
find setters and getters for those
attributes and weak and if we do we
assume that those are attributes that
you want that are part of your data
model and those are the ones that show
up and they're given the right type if
we can if we can figure it out otherwise
we set them to be the unknown type is
there some special class that you're
using now where does the lines come from
some some classes for example receiver
here we'll have issues variables
that point to other classes for example
message and address if we determine the
reverse engineering that the classes
that these things going to are also in
the set of classes that your reverse
engineering we assume that you want
those two entities related via to one
relationship so those that's those were
the lines that's where the lines come
from we also detect inheritance I don't
have it in this particular example but
if you have an inheritance relationship
between classes and both of those
classes are being reversed engineer you
will see the inheritance line so the
inheritance line looks a little bit like
this except that it's an open hero so
that's what's going on with their
reverse engineering process now let's
bring up the browser view to get a
little more detail into the editing of
the model a browser view contains the
same information that you see into your
diagram is just in the tabular form let
me hide this detail area first I'm going
to talk about it later so what you have
here is a very simple master-detail
relationship you have the list of
entities that you have in your model and
for each entity we display the
properties that are contained inside
that entity so as I select an entity
here I'm going to get a different set of
properties for each one other of the
entities now properties can either be
attributes or relationships let's look
at the more complex entity we have here
for example message where it's message
here we can sort on this message so here
are the combined properties for message
we can sort by kind we have attributes
and relationships so properties can
either be attributes or relationships
but you might want to structurally
they're different things attributes have
certain fields that you can access a
relationships has certain things you can
do with them so here we're showing you
things as properties combined so we have
a minimum set of common fields for them
but if you if you click on this corner
area right here you can choose to see
only the attributes or only
relationships or fetch request which we
don't reverse engineer right now but we
have attributes so it's not just a
filtering mechanism
we're actually changing notice that we
changed in the available columns that
you have for you because structurally
there are different things now speaking
of columns you don't start out seeing
everything that you have available for
simplicity reasons we don't want to
confuse you but there's a lot more stuff
in there so for example here in the
entities table view we're only showing
you showing you the name of the entity
if you option click I'm sorry control
click on the on the column name you get
to see all the other columns and you can
add whether it be into this abstract a
class that in maps to i'm going to add
all of them in this case so that's how
you add remember these if you don't see
the columns you might expect to see
they're just just add them so let's go
back to message you can see attributes
what kind of columns do I have available
for my attributes well the attribute to
type whether it's optional not transient
minimum value maximum value all of them
and for relationships we have the
destination the inverse relationship min
count max down to kill all of them now
the columns inside the table views here
are editable so for example for
relationship here here's the
relationship to address relationship to
mailbox I can change the destination by
just selecting the appropriate the
appropriate entity here and so if you
have you have a Deverell did all the
content is editable or both in the table
views and in the diagram view now let's
go to the detail the detail editor which
are hit before let me bring it up again
so here this is another area where you
can edit your information it behaves in
there in a particular way because you
can have two kinds of details right you
can have the detail for the entity if
you're clicking here so if I click on an
entity you'll notice that this little
easier highlights and the fields that
you see over here correspond to the
entity so it's the entity name the class
apparent if I click let me go back to
through a class that has a lot of
properties
if I click on a property the little pea
here highlights and the end the detail
here being shown is is the detail for
the property and editing so I can be
editing and property and then and then
want to go back to the entity that it
belongs to and edit the entity property
or GoPro the entity detail or go back to
the property detail and of course if you
select the relationship that property
looks that the detail looks different
now you might you might ask why do I
want an extra editable area here if I
can do a lot of the stuff in the diagram
view or in the diary or right here
writing the tables well this comes in
handy for multiple selection let's say I
select all of my entities and I look at
all the properties inside all of those
entities so now this middle area here is
showing me the list of all the available
properties in all the proper and all the
entities I selected you'll notice that
we added a column here entity
automatically when we detected multiple
selection so that you know which
property you're dealing with which
entity you're dealing with now let's
look at properties as attributes and
let's sort by type and let's look at all
the attributes that were reversed
engineered to be integers 32 if I
multiple select these I can set all of
them to be integer 64th in one in one
stroke looking so that that's the
motivation of this detail area that's
and and we're still no I think I think
that most most apply I think we got
everything that all of the fields in
here in the table view in an edible form
let's see one last thing about the
detail area so you have the entities
area of the properties these two icons
here the one on the Left shows you the
detail which I've been talking about it
all this time the I stands for user info
dictionary now entities and properties
and properties whether they be
attributes or relationships and contain
a user info dictionary this is just an
area where you can add your own keys and
values for however you want to
use them in your in your in your code so
if you look at the API for NS attribute
inscription in this entity's description
you'll see you can get to and instead a
dictionary so this is where you will be
saving the dictionary and it's the same
thing for no matter what I feel like so
i can select the property or i can
select an entity you stirring for
dictionaries just a user in for
dictionary so don't be confused by this
fields remember what what part you want
to edit I select an entity worse its
detail well let's look at the general
fields for that entity or they or the
user and the dictionary the last thing
the last kind of property I want to talk
about are these things called such
requests let's go the message and look
at properties so think of which requests
as a pre-built query into your data set
so I want to get all the messages that
meet a certain criteria now to build the
query you need a boolean editor so let's
add a fetch request hear my request okay
so we have something called a predicate
builder a predator builder is a
graphical boolean equation editor so you
can add knowns and combine them with
ands and ORS and I'm not going to go
into detail of creating a sophisticated
at a boolean expression here but
basically this is where you would define
criteria that you will eventually use
the runtime to fetch your data set now
the boolean equation is simply made up
by key value comparisons the keys come
from the entities that you're selected
and depending on the kind of key you're
selecting you have a set of values that
you can query on you can set you can
pour your own dates or non a boolean
value on strings and numbers so this is
a pretty nifty graphical editor and
you're able to go into to do things like
dragging notes between different places
so so that's a lot you can do with this
error again oh ok I think I think that
covers the the highlights of the of the
data model ending or 11 lesson
and dress wanted me to show you here you
saw that Andrea Kazan you just peruse
them will kept opening these things up
now this is your same document now right
the data is now your model you're used
to opening multiple windows of your text
information and as you type things in
one area you obviously see them updated
in the other area so the model
information is your model is the data so
if you move the if you move things
around they're moved in the other in the
other editor okay so that's the whole
thing is your model including including
the browser area so for the for the next
demo after a few more slides from Chris
we're going to go we're going to build
an actually running application but
that's that different this time thanks
for you so you've seen two ways in which
the data models are different from the
class models first that they model the
data elements and are heavily editable
so that you can go in and change things
and set settings on them there's another
way in which they're different in that
data models are essentially source files
in your project and they are built into
object files using the standard Xcode
build system this is important not just
for data models for core data framework
but for other framework for other models
will add in the future where you need to
model something run it through a process
at Build time and create an artifact a
compiled thing that you deliver with
your application for other data-driven
frameworks for example well just say
Koko scripting comes to mind so we have
built that structure into the plug-in
architecture of the design tools so the
dinning design tool can have a built-in
compiler or have a compiler spec that
run some other process on the system to
process its model at Build time and
create something in your deployed
executable so in just the same way that
a see file is transformed into a dot o
file it's built I'm a model file is
transformed into in this case a dot mom
file a managed object model schema file
and when you build a core data
application they just like your
object code is combined into an
executable that's in the mac OS folder
in your in your bundle the mom file is
tossed into the resource file and it's
just built there by the standard xcode
build rules so Miguel is going to show
you how to build a core data application
and how the pieces go together 196 me
again so now we're going to build a
functioning core data application you've
seen this again in the Indian core data
sessions before early in the week where
we're going to go through it again you
know a lot more detail as to what's
really happening at the tool level so
I'm going to create a new project you'll
notice that there's two new templates
there are now goes to the pre-existing
cocoa templates that we have we've
always had so we have now a core data
application template and the core data
document based application template I'm
going to create one of these colored
demo what's new in this templates what
do you get well you get three three big
things the first is that you're
automatically linked against the core
data framework obviously because you'll
be using it you get a slight change in
your document class so let me fix the
font here there's some there's a problem
with the tree view I have to reset the
font for it to read wrong okay that's
better so we're we're linked against the
core data framework first difference
second difference we give you a document
file just like we give you in the other
template except that this document file
inherits from this new class call and
it's persistent document I'm not going
to go into the details of the class you
want to show you the difference and the
third difference with this template is
that we give you a blank model where
you'll be putting your entities either
by reverse engineering or creating new
entities but we're going to do
everything from scratch here let's bring
up the browser area I'm going to create
a very simple model that has two
entities and a person entity and an
address entity and they'll be related
so let's create two entities I'm also
showing you the editing features here
and so the first entity elated here in
the table view it's called person the
second entity will edit in the diagram
view is called address let's add to two
attributes to the entity to the person
entity so let me expand all of my
compartments here where they died we
have the same mechanisms that you sauce
to find demo in the class diagram so we
can expand all so we're in person this
one this will have a field called first
name and this will have a field called
last name oops they just write the whole
thing backwards there and then we go to
address we are another field this will
be the street and it's not optional
because it's the only field we have in
there now here's what multiple selection
comes in handy i can select all of my oh
my entities i just added three fields
and I want the multiple strings so they
all become strings now let's add a
relationship between these two entities
so we select person we click on this
little plus are here we now have a
relationship the relationship will be
called the main address of the person
the destination will obviously be the
address entity you get the line and it's
a one-to-one relationship and that and
that's about all I'm going to do with
the relationship right now so let's look
at the nibs that we got doesn't have
much it's empty
let's create a simple UI for this for
this model so all I'm going to do is I'm
going to option drag person into the NIP
file and I'm going to drop it there and
interface builder comes up and says you
want a UI that handles many objects or
one object so I want to either handles
many objects so there's the UI no thank
you we've only shown you this three
times before but thanks for clapping so
what happened here for it for each end
for each app for the person we gave you
a table view where you can see multiple
multiple people that's the kind of UI h
owes to create where the columns come
from I got a column for each one of the
attributes i have in my person and of
course a detail selection area here for
to editor whatever i have selected in my
in my table view here add remove buttons
so this is the same thing for the notice
that because we have a relationship i
don't think we had shown you this in the
other demo i don't remember the
relationship part we have the main
address as a pop up here so we need a UI
to enter addresses too so let's go here
click on address also drag it there yeah
I want the same thing there's the UI and
let's just put it there ok so the same
thing happened we got a multiple you
i4ii editing multiple addresses the
street so let's quit interface builder
get back to our model okay so here's
where some new stuff happens I'm going
to build what is happening when we're
building we're compiling obviously your
source code you're all familiar with
that we're also compiling this we're
also compiling the data model I don't
think we have mentioned that in any in
any other session if you go into your
target area here and you look at your
sources you'll notice that as a source
you have your dot M but now you have
this new type of file which are your
actual model files
now what does it mean to compile a model
file well let's look at it and see
what's watching it let's reveal this
model file in the finder so this is
these are your project classes this is a
the model file your editing let's look
at it you shouldn't do this in home
because it's private but well I'll chose
here here so what you'll see inside that
model file are the internal files we use
in the tool to keep track of what you're
editing so we have an archived version
of your elements and delay out and all
this extra private secret stuff that we
have to make it to make the editing
experience nice for you but the runtime
doesn't need this thing that the runtime
is simply interested in the structural
information of your entities so that is
what compiling means compiling means
translating this data model file into a
highly optimized runtime version of the
file and the extension of that compiled
version is what we've been calling the
dot mom file so if we go if we look into
the build output here here's my compiled
application let's go look into it inside
the content you'll see that in the
Resources directory you will have a file
that has the same name as the model you
were creating in your in the tool but it
has the extension that mom so this is
the file that the framework loads at
runtime it's found in the in the
resources directory and if you have
multiple files we load all of them and
we combine them and we get all of the
entities okay so I wanted to explain
this in a lot more detail because it
gets how many people have used the old
deal modeler and ldos okay so the main
difference here is that the tool model
and the runtime model are different
things it used to be the same file in
the past so now let's run the
application so here's our UI when I did
the Dragon interface builder all of the
bindings were set for me and everything
works it's it might seem like magic but
it's all there for you which is we just
do the work for you that we don't really
hide anything you can always go into the
move and change things so i can add
we've demoed this before so I'm just
going to go and quickly and here i can
add myself i need to have an address so
i add an address i live in one main
street you'll notice that the moment i
add an address it shows up in the pop up
here because this is all being handled
by the core data frame work so i have my
address and i'm going to save it what i
want to show you is what happens when we
say so i'm going to save an xml format
my doc let's go my data we save will
quick the application i'm not what i
want to show you is where the saving
what happened when to safe so where did
I put it I didn't put it owww thank you
because one so here's our xml file what
i wanted to show you was what what's
inside it so let's open it and all right
that's a different one in my data one
everything was going so well
okay so that's the XML it's a human
readable representation of your file you
have a little structural information is
that the last name first name and the
actual content now why did I show you
this file size so you have the three
files right you have defiled your
editing the tool the thing is compiled
to a dud mom and where the data is
actually stored I just wanted to briefly
mention something highlight something
that Chris has mentioned you think that
in other sessions we do this thing
called with this we use this import
function right what does importing do
importing now that you know what all of
the files are about if you if you want
to experiment the input with the import
function the only things that you can
import are the dot mom file or the xml
files okay because they don't have any
visual information they're kind of
optimized or compiled versions of your
data but if you want to kind of reverse
engineer the entities are inside those
files you can always import them back in
put them back in and you need to import
into a blank file so you first need to
create the model and then do the
important that's that was the secret
that we've been using for the last two
days or three days in your demos the
important functionality and that's it
for this time great thanks
if you want to see more of how that
magic worked we'll all be in the Xcode
lab at end of the hall on the left after
this session so you can come play with
the tool will show you how to use it
most of the stuff that you've seen here
you can do at home we've made some
changes in the version that we're using
here at the show but you've got pretty
much everything you need to recreate
these demos on your tiger preview disk
and with Xcode two point oh so you can
try this at home data modeling as you
can see really helps you build and
navigate your schemas graphically create
models directly from code or from XML
that we've exported and to build your
entire core data application in the
Xcode tool without having to go out to
separate tools I think you'll find that
the integration of the design tool into
your workflow is really going to
significantly help and accelerate your
experience in building core data
applications so I've given you a taste
of the two main plugins that you get
with Xcode 2 point 0 as you can see we
put in a pretty big architecture the
diagramming architecture the modeling
architecture the building architecture
to make it possible for us to extend the
design tools over time Matt Formica is
here and so I'm going to give the
obligatory Mac Formica we're not talking
about anything beyond tiger at this
point explanation but I want to give you
some idea of where we think it's going
just so we don't have to listen to you
come up to the mic and say you know it
would be a great idea if you and then
we'd say thank you for the feedback
which will happen anyway there are a lot
of data driven frameworks in Mac OS 10
and it would make sense to model these
things with a modeling tool rather than
having you write xml files or
configuration files doing your Apple
script ability for your cocoa
application in a model would make a lot
more sense we wanted a modeling tool /
script ability for a long time we think
that we can move this in that direction
the preferences the ice Inc kit those
are all great candidates for having
modeling tools added and we're looking
at those and even looking at your
interface builder nib file as a diagram
of the objects rather than as things on
the screen see there's demand for that
just what we want we're also going to
improve the plugins we've got and extend
the class modeling the primary thing
that we know you're going to ask for
because it's kind of obvious and we do
it in interface builder and other tools
do it is well if I can do detailed
editing of the data model with that
browser well why don't you have one of
those so I can do it in the class model
as well so I can actually change my
source code or even create new classes
right in the diagram and have the source
files created it is harder than it
sounds it's easier than it looks we will
go in that direction and give it a try
but the main thing we want to do code my
code creation partisans over there
that's great the main thing we want to
do though is we want to along with the
rest of the Xcode plugins open this
plug-in API so you can create your own
design plugins so if you have your own
data driven framework or you have your
own direction that we are laggards in
going in you can add that to yourself
and we're working in that direction as
well so in summary design and modeling
is now an integral part of Xcode it's
not a bag hanging off the side it's not
a separate tool you have to launch it's
part of your workflow it works the way
you do rather than having a design and
modeling tool impose the workflow on you
you can integrate in to whatever
workflow you like you can choose
whichever one of the xcode multi window
or single window layouts you'd prefer to
use the design tools work just like
documents in those workflows it's a
versatile diagramming view you've seen
it already applied to two very different
kinds of models we expect to be able to
apply it to different kinds of models in
the future the core data it's built into
the build system so that it works for
models that create artifact files that
are loaded by data-driven frameworks
Maps something we can extend in the
future the class models I think are very
versatile and useful right now for
letting you analyze letting you explore
and letting you communicate what your
classes do in your application and it's
an extensible architecture so we have a
lot of room for growth in the future
Matt Formica is our tools evangelist
he's the key contact all feedback should
go to the Xcode feedback group once this
tools released the standard Xcode
discussion groups will apply but this is
an Xcode 2.0 only it is covered under
the non-disclosure so send us feedback
on xcode ash feedback at groups at apple
com